Good morning. Can you hear me?
I can indeed. Good morning.
Oh, good. Thank you so much.
Thank you for your submission.
Uh, we have 10 minutes with you
have been speaking to your submission.
If there is any time left,
there might be questions from
members, if that's okay with you.
That, that's lovely. Madam Chair, uh, committee members,
and thank you for the opportunity to submit In,
in the time I've got, I think I'll just concentrate on two
of the points I made.
Uh, one of them is about market studies.
Uh, the commission, as you know, already has the power
to do market studies
and to things like, uh, petrol stations,
supermarkets, what have you.
And the minister responsible is required to respond to
that market study within a reasonable time.
Now, the, the bill, as it stands, promotes a new power
for the commission to do a different kind of market study,
which is a regulation study.
And, uh, so that they can look into things like whether,
you know, land planning is preventing supermarkets opening
at the moment, as the bill stands.
Um, the minister is not required to respond in the way
that is required to respond to a normal market study.
So my submission is that
exactly the same requirements should be put on the minister
to respond to a commission regulation study as is currently,
or she is required to do, uh, to the regular market studies.
And I think this would be a very good accountability
mechanism because then you can see openly
what ideas the minister has decided to run with
or not run with, and you can see,
and also whether the ideas of the commissioner worked out.
So I think it's really important
that there is an accountability mechanism in there
for ministers to respond to regulation, uh, market studies
and, and give you folks in particular a chance
to pick over exactly what happened
and make sure that the money
that the commissioner has spent on these studies
isn't just ignored in a ministerial office somewhere.
So that, that was my first point.
Uh, the second one, and I'm sure you've had a lot on this
already, is about predatory pricing.
And my advice to you was, if, if it's in doubt, don't do it.
Um, and I've got a couple of reasons for that.
Uh, one of them is that we can all think very easily
of products that are actually given away for free.
And there's no question of the people supplying them, uh,
trying to recover the cost.
They're not predatory pricing.
Uh, nobody around the table, for example, has ever paid
for a software browser.
You get it free. Chrome came free, Firefox came free.
Uh, none of you has ever paid for a community newspaper.
Uh, none of you has paid for any TV NZ programs.
And there are reasons for that.
In all these cases, people are giving away the product
well below cost.
It can't be further below cost of free.
And, uh, because they're in the business of trying to get,
uh, as many eyeballs as possible in front
of their advertisers.
And it seems to me that there's a risk, uh,
that predatory pricing introduced, uh, as it stands
risk cutting across something
that is not only commercially sensible,
but it's actually valuable to consumers.
Uh, I can think of other examples beyond Sky tv, uh, being,
uh, having to face, uh, free TV NZ programs.
Uh, there are plenty of them around.
So my advice would be to think long
and hard about going down the bread free pricing route.
And my very, very final comment, leaving a little bit
of time for questions, is on p pricing.
The Aussies did exactly what's proposed in the bill, uh,
that for us a few years back and junked it,
and they decided, look, we'll give a go,
have a go at writing in p pricing into our competition law.
It's not working and backed away,
and the IES don't get everything right.
But I think on this occasion, they, they might have,
might have the right end of the stick.
So that's very much what I wanted to say.
There are other points I made,
but you've all had a chance to read them anyway,
and very much, uh, happy to take any questions.
Thank you. Uh, there is a question from Dr. David Wilson.
Am I right in saying Cher to you,
Donald? It looks like she's
You're indeed. Good, good.
Fol Roth.
Thank you. Um,
and I know you're sitting in the Trinity
Library there, that's, uh,
Well spotted.
Um, I want to pick up on, yes, we, I think we all sort
of agree with you on some of your comments
around predatory pricing.
It's a difficult topic,
but I wanna switch to, um, where you're saying
that the rights of the commission, um, to
investigate anti-competitive behavior,
you think this is an overly, uh,
it's overly intrusive into the activities of third parties.
In other words, we're getting all of this information
for free by legislating towards that end.
Yeah. However, we've had others
that have said this is gonna really
give some great insight into the, in those firms.
So can you just explain
to me why you think it's overly intrusive?
Yeah, I did. I, I frankly, I thought, uh, the,
the requirement that the proposed requirement
that the commission should be able to go
and make firms do calculations according
to the commission's methodology seemed
to me a little bit of a cheek, frankly.
Um, the commission already has compulsory data gathering
powers, uh, it can get any data in it likes, uh,
under existing legislature.
I think the section 98 orders don't, don't hold me to that,
but I think that's what they are.
So, again, gather, uh, any information,
it likes board minutes, you know, emails, yada, yada.
Uh, so I don't think it's at all confined in its ability
to gather information.
I think that's just fine.
Uh, my point was I thought they were pushing the boat out a
little bit too far in requiring third parties
to do complicated calculations on the commission's behalf.
I mean, what is the commission for? That's its job.
Right? Thank you. Thank you so much,
Donald, for your submission. Thank you.
You're welcome. Bye-bye.
Um, next, uh, if we have DLA pipe. Really? Yeah. Correct.
Thank you.
Good Morning. Good morning is good morning.
Correct. Uh,
Thank you so much for your submission.
We have 10 minutes with you, right?
So after you have finished, uh, speaking to your submission,
if there is any time left,
there might be questions from
members, if that's okay with you.
Very good, thank you. Thank You.
Yeah. Call Mark Williamson win
and my colleague, uh,
and it's a real privilege to be here today to speak briefly
to our submission, uh, on the bill.
Uh, we'll be making, uh, four points.
I was talking about four topics.
I will do, uh, two,
and then my colleague, uh, will, uh, do too as well.
Um, so I, I guess we'll get into it.
Uh, my first topic, uh, which was touched on
by the last submitter, is predatory pricing.
And I guess, um, based on my, uh, experience
of this era of working, uh, for, for the last 25 years,
my view is that context and, uh, markets
and firm structures matters, uh, with competition law.
And, uh, that's why, uh, I've always,
um, valued and,
and been supportive of New Zealand's, uh,
principles, uh, based approach.
Uh, which then gives the ability of the commission
and the Corps to look at the individual facts, uh,
look at at particular firms and,
and reach a view on, uh, the application
of the principle two markets, uh, to meet outcomes
for the long-term benefit of consumers.
And, uh, my sense of, uh, the predatory pricing change
is that, uh, the, the, the clause is, is really
more in the nature of a guidance, uh, note, which, which
is the, the European approach.
And rather than seeking to, uh, prescriptively,
you know, set out a test would be better to let the, uh,
the, the, the, which effectively the new clause 36, uh,
bid in and apply.
And the commission could, uh, again, adopt, uh,
the guidance, uh, which, which again is guidance
and it can be tailored, uh, by the commission
and ultimately the court for the particular circumstance.
Uh, so that, that's our, uh, submission on, uh,
section 36, which is the predatory pricing.
And yeah, there's, there's more detail around
that is set out in the submission around the definitions
and the like, and how you apply those in complex, uh,
multi-product markets, how you apply them to, to
two-sided markets, uh, where there's a platform and, and,
and in two markets.
It's, it's, these things are complex.
Uh, that's not to say that, uh, there isn't a key role
for the commerce act in those areas,
but I think it's ultimately, uh, the best approach is to,
to set the overall rule, which is we don't want a, uh, firm
with substantial market power, uh,
to substantially lessen competition.
And then how we get to that is best done, uh,
through guidance in the court and, uh, and the like.
So that's our submission on that.
Uh, the next, uh, thing is the change
to assets of a business.
So, uh, I guess historically the
was very clear in terms of how it approached, uh,
structural regulation through, uh, part three
and part two, which was more the, if you like, bear
or contracts arrangements for understandings.
And there's, um, and,
and the two, the two sections kind of worked in parallel.
And if you think about it, there's, there's more scrutiny,
uh, needed for contracts, arrangements for understandings,
and, you know, bordering on cartel conduct
because they don't have the degree of integration
that you see in a, in, in, you know,
if there is an acquisition of shares
or a business, you know, coming together of parties
to create efficiency.
So I, I guess, um, what I see in the change
to assets is, is, is a blur
or a, a movement towards, um, a, you know,
bringing part three and part two close to together.
And, and I guess, uh,
when I looked at the Australian section, I saw
that there is a carve out for, I think, business
as usual transactions,
because obviously there's a range of, um, assets
that firms buy
and sell in the ordinary course of business
that you could imagine if there was a shortage of those,
you know, it could actually have an impact on the market.
So that was my only, uh, submission on that point.
It's just to look carefully at, um, any implications
of making this change and,
and moving the, the sort of blurring the lines
between the two sections.
And just to consider the, uh, position, uh, in Australia,
which, um, as I said, has this kind of business
as usual, uh, carve out.
So those are my two, uh, parts.
Now I'll hand over to nu to speak to our other, uh,
two points that we'd like to make.
Thank you. Uh, good morning,
and thank you for the opportunity to speak
to our submission.
I'll be talking about two topics.
The first is, uh, behavioral undertakings,
and the second is the proposed repeal
of section 46 of the act.
Um, I'll talk first about behavioral undertakings.
Um, as the committee will be aware, a lot
of in has been spilled over the years
on empowering the commission
to accept behavioral undertakings in emerging context,
I think was in 1989, the first time.
Um, Andy suggested that,
and it's not until today where it's actually been, uh,
proposed to amend the, uh, act
to empower the commission to accept them.
Uh, and we really do welcome that change,
uh, for a couple of reasons.
The first is that it aligns New Zealand's merger regime
with Austral and other comparable
international jurisdictions.
Um, and second, it makes, uh, the act internally consistent.
The commission is already able
to accept behavior undertakings in other contexts.
And so ultimately this is a,
it's another tool in the regulatory toolbox to get, uh,
the efficient transfer of assets across the line.
Um, that said, as it's currently pitched, we think
that there are a couple of limits to
how it's being proposed.
Um, the first issue that we see is, um,
whether or not it should be a backstop to a, uh,
a divestment undertaking currently as it's proposed.
Um, the power to accept an undertaking will only be allowed
where a divestment undertaking would be insufficient.
Um, and,
and leaving aside the issues with, um, the ambiguity
around when a divestment is insufficient, um, we think
that it should be open to parties to offer
to the commission, um,
and undertaking that is appropriate in their circumstances.
Um, and I guess the, the second issue
that we see is currently section 93
or the proposed amendments to section 93 of the ACT
inoculates the decision of the commission
to accept the behavioral undertaking from
any judicial scrutiny.
Um, you know, we think that if parties
of the view that, um, the commission should have
accepted a behavioral undertaking, it should be open to them
to test that proposition in a court.
Um, again, that's somewhat
inconsistent with the rest of the act.
Um, and I'll move now to the second,
uh, aspect of my, uh, submission, which is the proposed
repeal of section 48, uh, sorry, 46.
Um, the effect of section 46 currently is
that it inoculates merger, uh, sort of decisions
or, um, from part two of the act, uh,
restrictive trade practices, A mean
or repealing Section 46 has the effect of
testing those, uh, decisions against part two
of the act, uh, restrictive trade practices.
Um, what that means is that for the first time section
or clearance decisions are tested for
and anti-competitive purpose,
and it also means
that they're no longer scrutinized just under a merger lens.
So some of the effects that, that we see are things like,
um, I guess board papers
and things that might suggest an anti-competitive purpose
suddenly become, um, they become scrutinized
by the commission for an anti-competitive purpose
and other internal documents.
Um, so I guess ultimately, um, currently
every acquisition removes, uh, well,
is a contract arrangement understanding that remove,
that could remove a competitor from the market.
And so section 46 gives parties the confidence
that their transaction will be tested under just the,
uh, the merger lens.
And, uh, that takes us to the end of our submission,
End, our submission.
And we thank you, obviously,
and you have heard this from a number of parties.
We think the repeal of section 46, you know, it's, it's good
to test, it's always good to check whether, um, you know,
in an older piece of legislation, uh,
every clause is still needed or every section.
But this one does have some, um, utility
and it creates these unintended consequences,
which I don't think were in the contemplation of, of MB
or anyone when they, uh, put this forward.
Thank you so much, uh, for your submission, your time.
It really well. We don't have any time left for Christians.
Thank you. Have a good day. Bye-bye.
Excellent. Thank you. Bye-bye.
So the next we have the banking reform, uh, coalition.
Thank you,
Uh, Kia. Good
Morning. Is that Ken? Dustin,
thank you so much.
We have 10 minutes with you
and you've seen how it works. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, thank you members.
Um, let me tell you a story about the price of bread, uh,
because this goes to the heart of this particular bill
back in the second half of last year, famously, the price
of bread increased by 58%.
Uh, now this caused, uh, quite a bit
of media coverage and concern.
Um, the thing is, bread is actually pretty simple stuff.
Uh, flour, water, salt, um, you know, some starter, uh,
labor energy, you know, those kind of things.
So the question is, why did the power, why did the price
of bread go fif go up 58% when the price
of flour only rose 5% and the price of labor weed up 2%
and the price of electricity went up 12%?
Why did it go up 58%?
And the answer is, well, it appears
that we don't have competition in this country.
We have a supermarket duopoly, uh,
and we have oligopolies in practically
every sector of the economy.
So as a result, there is no good explanation as
to why the price of bread went up 58% other than it could.
Now, this goes to the heart of the problems with this bill.
Um, as a result of the, um, the Commerce Commission, Jo, uh,
Dr. Small and his team can do nothing about the fact
that the price of bread rose 58% when there appears
to be no underlying competitive justification for that.
Once this bill goes through, if this bill becomes law,
the commission will still have no powers at all
to do anything about the price of bread rising by 58%.
This bill is entirely ineffective.
This bill will not achieve any of the, the objectives
that the country requires, which is the return
to competitive markets.
So this is a structural failing with the bill,
and it's a considerable concern
to the banking reform coalition
that the minister has put up a bill
and wasted the time of parliament, of submitters, um,
you know, of the, the country itself in making
what are very small scale incremental changes that sort
of just fiddle in the margins.
And the problem is that there is,
this bill is predicated on the idea
that the Commerce Act is working perfectly well
and that, uh, it all needs is,
all it needs is some minor tweaks in order to optimize it.
And that's clearly not the case,
because if that was the case, the price
of bread would not have increased 58% when there was no
underlying rationale for it.
Most of New Zealand's markets are dominated by oligopolies.
That's the case in banking.
It's the case in supermarkets,
it's the case in building products.
It's the case in electricity,
and it's a very, very long list as the OECD tells us.
And these, uh, oligopolies are extracting well
above market returns for their activities.
So the banking,
the profits outta the banking sector now constitute more
than 3% of our entire GDP.
So that's about three times larger
than the equivalent in Europe.
The return on, uh, uh, return on equity
for a SB bank is at 22%.
The OECD benchmark is 7%.
Nothing in this bill will address that.
The, the issue with the, uh, with our competition law is
that we require the restructuring of markets.
So the, the, the, the fundamental premise of this bill is
that markets are working efficiently when they are not.
In order to be able to get the restructuring of markets,
the commission needs to be empowered to step in
and restructure them.
Exactly has happened
with Telecom New Zealand back in the 2010s
where we said we have a, an oppressive, uh, a monopoly in
that case that was holding the country back
and the country that the parliament stepped in legislated
for this and broke it up.
And we can see the positive results
that have come from this since.
Now. The problem right now is that at the moment,
we require separate legislation for each
of the dysfunctional markets that occurs.
So we would require separate legislation for supermarkets,
separate legislation for banks,
separate legislation for electricity companies.
This is clearly unworkable, given the scale of the damage
that has been done to our economy
by the pernicious effects of oligopolies.
So we are advocating that this bill is sent back
and redrafted,
and the purpose of the redraft is to adopt what is
timidly presented as option three, uh, in the R, which is
to say the commission is given the regulatory power
to be able to restructure markets without
the approval of cabinet.
Now, the important part is the approval of cabinet.
And we've seen, uh,
in this administration under Minister Simpson
decisions coming outta cabinet
or indecisions coming out of cabinet
that are clearly not in the best interest of New Zealanders.
And the one I'm gonna draw attention
to is the triple CFA amendment.
Now this was a technical, uh, change
and it had some useful things in it,
but as a result of the lobbying that clearly occurred
with Minister Simpson, it also removed.
Well, you know, uh, if the bill had proceeded
as Minister Simpson proposed, it would've stopped, uh,
a court case in flight.
That was a class action to get back from, uh,
the Australian owned banks excess fees
that they had charged.
Mm-hmm. Minister Simpson's actions
would have stopped the settlement that just occurred
with a SB bank prior to Christmas that returned $136 million
from the Australian owned banks back to New Zealanders.
So we have a Minister of Commerce
who put forward an amendment to make Australians richer
at the cost of New Zealanders.
Now, when we are seeing these kinds of decisions out
of cabinet, when we are seeing, for instance, that
as is well known
and reported in the media Minister Simpson's families,
family owned supermarkets, we are not seeing any reform
of the supermarket sector exactly.
Nothing has occurred to bring down prices
and supermarkets during Minister Simpson's reign.
Uh, bank profits have risen to historical highs.
Supermarket margins have risen to historical highs.
Electricity profits have risen to historical highs.
So whoever Minister Simpson's working
for it clearly doesn't appear to be us.
So as a result of this, can I just say these amendments?
Can I just, uh, say that, that look ministers,
usually it's a very high threshold
because people say lots of things about ministers,
but I just want to caution you about
where you're going with this.
Doesn't have the, uh, thank, thank you Madam Chair.
Uh, I point out
that nothing I've said is factually inaccurate.
Um, the important thing here in this context is difficult
to trust ministerial judgment
and cabinet judgment when we see the
perpetuation of these oligopolies.
Therefore, we are recommending that this bill be sent back
for redrafting with the effect that it is the regulator
that can restructure markets
and not the politicians of the day.
Because this insulates the country from the effects
of lobbying that can occur during a political process,
when in fact, the restructuring of a market is a thing
that is entirely obvious as needs to happen in, uh,
some fundamental areas of our economy.
And no progress is being made on this
from the political side.
Mm-hmm. And also, I just want you to, uh, be aware that
Minister Simpson doesn't have delegation
for supermarkets Exactly.
For the reason he declared the conflict
of interest, as far as I remember.
Uh, yes. And you'll be aware, of course, that, uh,
in the media recently, uh, uh, as a result of the RFI
that was put out by the Minister of Finance, uh,
there were no respondents at all.
No meetings have been held and supermarket prices
and the price of bread went up
by 58%, uh, prior to Christmas.
There was any questions, uh, Dr. David,
who's assembling the evidence,
Uh, the Commerce Commission itself, uh,
which will require, of course, it does have all
of the rigors of the market studies.
Uh, and having participated in a couple
of the market studies, I'd have to call out the quality
and excellence of the work being done
by Dr. Small and his team.
Uh, the quality of the market studies is exemplary
by international standards.
Thank you, Kim. Any other questions or clarifications?
Members? Uh, thank you for your time.
Thank you for your submission. Thank
You.
Uh, thanks. We have Patrick,
do we now in the room here, Patrick?
Yes, please come forward.
I might just Yeah, Of course. Yeah.
Hold this page.
So when you're ready, Patrick,
we have five minutes with you.
Yes, thank you. And after you finish, uh, speaking
to your submission, there might be questions from him.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. Excuse me.
Thank you, chair, for the opportunity to make this,
uh, oral submission.
It's based on my experience, particularly as general manager
finance for, excuse me, telecom
Sparks predecessor,
and as my two terms
as commissioner at the Commerce Commission,
I'm currently a finance
and economic expert lay member of the high court
under the Commerce Act.
And that has, uh, limited some of the comments I would make
because of matters that might come,
I might be involved in a different capacity.
Um, I would like you to please
put up the first slide if you could.
Can you do that
While that's happening?
Um, in enacting the bill,
parliament will strengthen the commission's power
to promote competition in New Zealand markets.
As always, an economic policy achieving
that benefit will incur costs
including inhibiting achievement of economies of scale
and inflicting compliance costs.
The side that you have, uh, illustrates that issue,
the words are mine, but the images from Google Gemini,
um, it's a wonderful thing.
AI in terms of making presentations look more attractive.
I believe the benefits will outweigh the costs
because the commission's exercise
of its new powers will be governed under the reformed
structure of the Commerce Commission, uh,
in the reform bill that is being referred
to this committee last week.
And my comments, therefore are covering in a sense
or in the context that that bill will change the, uh,
way the governance works.
Um, the slide that, uh, the second of my slides,
um, which you have, I hope yes, we have a copy,
illustrates my concept of
how the new governance structure should work
to achieve the promotion of competition,
while minimizing the cost to the, the concept is
of an air traffic controller, uh, who is controlling the,
um, aircraft.
And in a way, the board, um,
the new governance board will be in the position, uh,
similar to that in as much
as it doesn't make the regulatory decisions,
but does guide the way they're made.
It will be challenging to make
that structure work entirely smoothly.
Um, but I'll comment on that
and a submission I intend to make on that bill.
So I'll leave there.
Um, the submissions to this committee have included concerns
regarding the proposed new powers, including the authority
to initiate market studies
and to compel provision of information and analysis.
I, I believe myself that these new powers are warranted.
As a commissioner, I did experience the resistance
of market, some market participants, uh, not a minority
regarding the commission undertaking analysis
of suppliers behavior, and of market structure.
Nevertheless, the new powers are
potentially quite intrusive.
The governance reform in effect separates overall governance
from the specific exercise of those powers that should help
ensure the powers are appropriately applied.
In my written submission, I suggest this committee recommend
to parliament, excuse me, I'm sorry,
recommend to parliament insertion of requirements
that the commission published documents on the frameworks
under which it will exercise the new powers it will have
under the bill's provisions.
Such requirements would need to be tailored to each
of the specific new powers,
and the committee would need officials
to advise on the suitable statement of requirements.
As a commissioner, I was, um, uh, heavily involved
in the implementation of the,
what was then the new part four of the Commerce Act.
And we were required by that act
or that, uh, modification to determine a set
of input methodologies, which
is an obscure term,
but it was the framework which would govern the exercise
of the specific regulatory powers,
and in particular, determine components such as the cost
of capital, specifying the methodology, not the outcome.
Obviously, a similar approach could be applied
regarding aspects of the new powers.
And on the slides I have, uh, illustrated, um,
at the, you know, the particular way that could apply in my,
um, written submission.
I provide more detail to chair.
Uh, so sorry to interrupt, Patrick.
It's already five minutes. Do you want
I just have a final closing paragraph.
Yeah. Um, if the commission was required
to issue such frameworks as determinations, that, and,
and that's the term i I wanted to mention,
that would mean effective parties could apply to the courts
for merits review of the frameworks to assist the committee.
I've asked the secretariat to provide you with copies
of a recent high court judgment that explains
the difference between merits reviews and judicial reviews.
And also I might add is some interest in itself
and I think you would find
valuable in your consideration of Bill.
It does point out that if the commission makes a mistake,
which is what that's about, it um, causes a lot of problems.
I hope it wouldn't make that type of mistake. Again,
Thank you so much for your submission.
Thank you for your time. Ms.
Um, members, we go into practice.